!standard 11.3(4/2)                                 12-12-09    AI12-0054-1/02
!standard 13.9.2(2)
!standard 13.9.2(3/3)
!class binding interpretation
!status work item 12-12-08
!status received 12-12-07
!priority High
!difficulty Medium
!qualifier Error
!subject A raise_expression does not cause membership failure

!summary

Consider:

    subtype S is Integer
        with Dynamic_Predicate => Is_Gnarly(S) or else raise Program_Error;

then a membership test "X in S" does not raise Program_Error just because
Is_Gnarly(X) returns False. Similarly, "X'Valid" does not raise Program_Error
just because Is_Gnarly(X) returns False.

!question

AI12-0022-1, "Raise expressions for specifying the exception raised for an
assertion" added the ability to control which exception is raised by failure of
various assertions. This is an important capability, because it allows to change
interfaces to use assertions while preserving compatibility.

However, this feature doesn't work properly for predicates, because predicates
are evaluated by membership tests, so we would get spurious failures. Should
these spurious failures be removed from the language, so that raise_expressions
can be used in predicates? (Yes.)

!recommendation

See !summary.

!wording

11.3(4/2) was amended by AI12-0022-1 as follows:

... For the execution of a raise_statement with an exception_name, the named
exception is raised. {Similarly, for the evaluation of a raise_expression, the
named exception is raised.} [{In both of these cases, if}[If] a
string_expression is present, the expression is evaluated and its value is
associated with the exception occurrence.] ...

Add a new paragraph after that:

There is one exception to the above rule: For an individual membership test (see
4.5.2) of the form "X in S", where S has a predicate that contains a
raise_expression, if that raise_expression is evaluated, then the exception is
not raised; instead, the entire predicate immediately evaluates to False. This
includes raise_expressions contained within the default_expression for a formal
parameter, but not raise_expressions within the default_expression for a
component.

Modify 13.9.2(2-3/3) so it refers to the semantics of "in" rather than directly to the semantics of the predicate, so the newly-modified semantics of "in"
automatically work for 'Valid:

2   For a prefix X that denotes a scalar object Redundant[(after any implicit
dereference)]{of nominal subtype S}, the following attribute is defined:

3/3 X'Valid     Yields True if and only if the object denoted by
                X is normal, has a valid representation, and the [predicate of
                the nominal subtype of X]{the membership test "X in S"} evaluates
                to True. The value of this attribute is of the predefined type
                Boolean.


!discussion

Note that "contains" in the new wording means statically/textual containment.
We're not talking about anything dynamic. But we do include formal parameter
defaults.

The purpose of a raise_expression in an assertion is to specify which exception
is raised on failure. For example:

    subtype S is Integer
        with Dynamic_Predicate => Is_Round(S) or else raise Program_Error;

is not really saying that Program_Error should be raised. It is saying that
Is_Round should be True for all objects of subtype S (and, oh by the way, if
it's not, then Program_Error should be raised instead of the usual exception).

That works just fine for parameter passing and the like:

    procedure P(X: S);
    ...
    P(X);

If Is_Round(X) is False on the call, Program_Error is raised as expected.
But if we have:

    Some_Integer : Integer := ...;
    ...
    if Some_Integer in S then
        ...

we don't want to raise Program_Error. We want the 'if' condition to return True
or False according to whether Is_Round(X) is True. Therefore, we change the rule
so that "Is_Round(S) or else raise Program_Error" is evaluated as "Is_Round(S)
or else False" -- but only for membership tests.

Note that this special case for raise_expressions in membership tests does not
apply to any other ways of raising an exception. For example, if Is_Round(X)
propagates an exception, then the membership test propagates that exception
occurrence.

The following example shows how to raise a particular exception for a particular
"reason" the predicate fails. If the evaluation of "X in T" evaluates one of the
raise_exceptions, then "X in T" will be True.

    type T is ...
        with Predicate =>
            (T >= First_Allowed or else raise Too_Small) and then
            (T <= Last_Allowed or else raise Too_Big) and then
            (Is_Good(T) or else raise Badness);

Rationale for the default_expression business: A defaulted parameter really
should be strongly equivalent to an explicit parameter. Switching from one to
the other should not cause subtle changes in run-time semantics. The component
case is less clear, but there would be an implementation difficulty if we made
the opposite choice, for implementations that choose to wrap default
initializations in an initialization procedure (whether or not inlined), because
an extra "we're in an 'in'" flag would need to be passed.

Intended implementation: If the implementation chooses to generate code for
predicates inline at the places where they are used, then it would be
appropriate to replace "raise ..." with a jump to "return False from the
predicate" whenever the predicate is being evaluated as part of a membership
test. If an implementation uses an out-of-line function to evaluate the
predicate, it can pass an extra "In_Membership" flag, or it can generate two
copies of the function.

An implementation that wraps the predicate with an exception handler like "when
others => False" would be incorrect. An implementation that turns "raise ..."
into "False" would also be wrong.

!appendix

This AI was created out of a problem noted during discussion on AI12-0037-1
during ARG meeting #48 in Boston.

****************************************************************

From: Tucker Taft
Sent: Saturday, December  8, 2012  12:06 PM

I think a raise expression in a predicate should yield False only if it has a
boolean expected type.

****************************************************************

